<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Bibliography</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="bibliography" epub:type="bibliography">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Bibliography</h2>
			<ol>
				<li>
					<p><i xml:lang="fr"><b epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Les Amants de Melicent</b>, Traduction moderne, annotée et procedée d’un notice historique sur Nicolas de Caen, par l’Abbé. * * * A Paris. Pour Iaques Keruer aux deux Cochetz, Rue S. Iaques, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.D.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLVI</span>. Avec Privilège du Roy.</i> The somewhat abridged reprint of 1788 was believed to be the first version printed in French, until the discovery of this unique volume in 1917.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Armageddon</b>; or the Great Day of the Lord’s Judgement: a <i xml:lang="la">Parcenesis</i> to Prince Henry⁠—<b epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Melicent</b>; an heroicke poeme intended, drawne from French bookes, the First Booke, by Sir William Allonby. London. Printed for Nathaniel Butler, dwelling at the Pied Bull, at Saint Austen’s Gate. 1626.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<i xml:lang="de"><b epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Perion und Melicent</b>, zum erstenmale aus dem Franzôsischen ins Deutsche ubersetzt, von <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. H. G.</abbr> Lowe. Stuttgart und Tübingen, 1823.</i>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i xml:lang="pt"><b epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="pt">Los Negociantes do Don Perion</b>, publicado por Plancher-Seignot.</i> Rio de Janeiro, 1827. The translator’s name is not given. The preface is signed <abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:personal-name">R. L.</abbr></p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i xml:lang="it"><b epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="it">La donna di Demetrio</b>, Historia piacevole e morale, da Antonio Checino.</i> Milan, 1833.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i xml:lang="da"><b epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="da">Prindsesses Melicent</b>, oversat af <b epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Le Roman de Lusignan</b>, og udgivna paa Dansk vid <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Knôs.</i> Copenhagen, 1840.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Antiquae Fabulae et Comediae</b>, edid. <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Rask. Göttingen, 1852. <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 61 et seq. “<b epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">De Fide Melicentis</b>”⁠—an abridged version of the romance.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i xml:lang="nl"><b epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="nl">Perion en Melicent</b>, voor de Nederlandsche Jeugduiitgegeven door <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. M. L.</abbr> Wolters.</i> Groningen, 1862.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i xml:lang="fr"><b epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Nouvelles Françoises en prose du <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span>e et de <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XV</span>e siècle</b>, Les textes anciens, édités et annotés par <abbr>MM.</abbr> Armin et Moland.</i> Lyons, 1880. <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 89 et seq., “<b epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Le Roman de la Belle Melicent</b>”⁠—a much condensed form of the story.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Soul of Melicent</b>, by James Branch Cabell. Illustrated in colour by Howard Pyle. New York, 1913. This rendering was made, of course, before the discovery of the 1546 version, and so had not the benefit of that volume’s interesting variants from the abridgment of 1788.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i xml:lang="fr"><b epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Cinq Ballades de Nicolas de Caen</b>, traduites en verse du <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Roman de Lusignan</span>, par <abbr>Mme.</abbr> Adolpe Galland, et mises en musique par Raoul Bidoche.</i> Paris, 1898.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i xml:lang="fr"><b epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Le Liure de Mélusine</b> en frācoys, par Jean d’Arras.</i> Geneva, 1478.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="es">Historia de la linda Melosyna</b>. Tolosa, 1489.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i xml:lang="nl"><b epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="nl">Een san sonderlingke schone ende wonderlike historie</b>, die men warachtich kout te syne ende autentick sprekende van eenre vrouwen gheheeten Mélusine.</i> Tantwerpen, 1500.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Die Histori oder Geschicht von der edle und schönen Melusina</b>. Augsburg, 1547.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i xml:lang="fr"><b epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">L’histoire de Mélusine</b>, fille du roy d’Albanie et de dame Pressine, revue et mise en meilleur langage que par cy devant.</i> Lyons, 1597.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i xml:lang="fr"><b epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Le roman de Mélusine</b>, princesse de Lusignan, avec l’histoire de Geoffry, surnommé à la Grand Dent, par Nodot.</i> Paris, 1700.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i xml:lang="cs"><b epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="cs">Kronyke Kratochwilne</b>, o ctné a slech netné Panně Meluzijně</i>. Prag, 1760.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i xml:lang="de"><b epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Wunderbare Geschichte von der edeln und schönen Melusina</b>, welche eine Tochter des König Helmus und ein Meerwunder gewesen ist.</i> Nurnberg, without date: reprinted in Marbach’s <b epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Volksbücher</b>, Leipzig, 1838.</p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
