<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXIX: How a Bargain Was Cried</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-4" id="chapter-29" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIX</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">How a Bargain Was Cried</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Now about sunset Melicent knelt in her oratory and laid all her grief before the Virgin, imploring counsel.</p>
			<p>This place was in reality a chapel, which Demetrios had builded for Melicent in exquisite enjoyment. To furnish it he had sacked towns she never heard of, and had rifled two cathedrals, because the notion that the wife of Demetrios should own a Christian chapel appeared to him amusing. <i epub:type="se:name.visual-art.sculpture">The Virgin</i>, a masterpiece of Pietro <span xml:lang="it">di Vicenza</span>, Demetrios had purchased by the interception of a free city’s navy. It was a painted statue, very handsome.</p>
			<p>The sunlight shone on Melicent through a richly coloured window wherein were shown the sufferings of Christ and the two thieves. This siftage made about her a welter of glowing and intermingling colours, above which her head shone with a clear halo.</p>
			<p>This much Ahasuerus noted. He said, “You offer tears to Miriam of Nazara. Yonder they are sacrificing a bull to Mithras. But I do not make either offering or prayer to any god. Yet of all persons in Nacumera I alone am sure of this day’s outcome.” Thus spoke the Jew Ahasuerus.</p>
			<p>The woman stood erect now. She asked, “What of the day, Ahasuerus?”</p>
			<p>“It has been much like other days that I have seen. The sun rose without any perturbation. And now it sinks as usual. Oh, true, there has been fighting. The sky has been clouded with arrows, and horses, nicer than their masters, have screamed because these soulless beasts were appalled by so much blood. Many women have become widows, and divers children are made orphans, because of two huge eyes they never saw. Puf! it is an old tale.”</p>
			<p>She said, “Is Perion hurt?”</p>
			<p>“Is the dog hurt that has driven a cat into a tree? Such I estimate to be the position of Orestes and Perion. Ah, no, this Perion who was my captain once is as yet a lord without any peer in the fields where men contend in battle. But love has thrust him into a bag’s end, and his fate is certain.”</p>
			<p>She spoke her steadfast resolution. “And my fate, too. For when Perion is trapped and slain I mean to kill myself.”</p>
			<p>“I am aware of that,” he said. “Oh, women have these notions! Yet when the hour came, I think, you would not dare. For I know your beliefs concerning hell’s geography, and which particular gulf of hell is reserved for all self-murderers.”</p>
			<p>Then Melicent waited for a while. She spoke later without any apparent emotion. “And how should I fear hell who crave a bitterer fate! Listen, Ahasuerus! I know that you desire me as a plaything very greatly. The infamy in which you wade attests as much. Yet you have schemed to no purpose if Perion dies, because the ways of death are always open. I would die many times rather than endure the touch of your finger. Ahasuerus, I have not any words wherewith to tell you of my loathing⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Turn then to bargaining,” he said, and seemed aware of all her thoughts. “Oh, to a hideous bargain. Let Perion be warned of those troops that will tomorrow outflank him. Let him escape. There is yet time. Do this, dark hungry man, and I will live.” She shuddered here. “Yes, I will live and be obedient in all things to you, my purchaser, until you shall have wearied of me, or, at the least, until God has remembered.”</p>
			<p>His careful eyes were narrowed. “You would bribe me as you once bribed Demetrios? And to the same purpose? I think that fate excels less in invention than in cruelty.”</p>
			<p>She bitterly said, “Heaven help me, and what other wares have I to vend!”</p>
			<p>He answered:</p>
			<p>“None. No woman has in this black age; and therefore comfort you, my girl.”</p>
			<p>She hurried on. “Therefore anew I offer Melicent, who was a princess once. I cry a price for red lips and bright eyes and a fair woman’s tender body without any blemish. I have no longer youth and happiness and honour to afford you as your toys. These three have long been strangers to me. Oh, very long! Yet all I have I offer for one charitable deed. See now how near you are to victory. Think now how gloriously one honest act would show in you who have betrayed each overlord you ever served.”</p>
			<p>He said:</p>
			<p>“I am suspicious of strange paths, I shrink from practising unfamiliar virtues. My plan is fixed. I think I shall not alter it.”</p>
			<p>“Ah, no, Ahasuerus! think instead how beautiful I am. There is no comelier animal in all this big lewd world. Indeed I cannot count how many men have died because I am a comely animal⁠—” She smiled as one who is too tired to weep. “That, too, is an old tale. Now I abate in value, it appears, very lamentably. For I am purchasable now just by one honest deed, and there is none who will barter with me.”</p>
			<p>He returned:</p>
			<p>“You forget that a freed Perion would always have a sonorous word or two to say in regard to your bargainings. Demetrios bargained, you may remember. Demetrios was a dread lord. It cost him daily warfare to retain you. Now I lack swords and castles⁠—I who dare love you much as Demetrios did⁠—and I would be able to retain neither Melicent nor tranquil existence for an unconscionable while. Ah, no! I bear my former general no grudge. I merely recognise that while Perion lives he will not ever leave pursuit of you. I would readily concede the potency of his spurs, even were there need to look on you a second time⁠—It happens that there is no need! Meanwhile I am a quiet man, and I abhor dissension. For the rest, I do not think that you will kill yourself, and so I think I shall not alter my fixed plan.”</p>
			<p>He left her, and Melicent prayed no more. To what end, she reflected, need she pray, when there was no hope for Perion?</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
