<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<p id="id00088" style="margin-top: 4em">1.</p>
			<p id="id00089" style="margin-top: 2em">
				<i>How Perion Was Unmasked</i>
			</p>
			<p id="id00090">Perion afterward remembered the two weeks spent at Bellegarde as in recovery from illness a person might remember some long fever dream which was all of an intolerable elvish brightness and of incessant laughter everywhere. They made a deal of him in Count Emmerick’s pleasant home: day by day the outlaw was thrust into relations of mirth with noblemen, proud ladies, and even with a king; and was all the while half lightheaded through his singular knowledge as to how precariously the self-styled Vicomte de Puysange now balanced himself, as it were, upon a gilded stepping-stone from infamy to oblivion.</p>
			<p id="id00091">Now that King Theodoret had withdrawn his sinister presence, young Perion spent some seven hours of every day alone, to all intent, with Dame Melicent. There might be merry people within a stone’s throw, about this recreation or another, but these two seemed to watch aloofly, as royal persons do the antics of their hired comedians, without any condescension into open interest. They were together; and the jostle of earthly happenings might hope, at most, to afford them matter for incurious comment.</p>
			<p id="id00092">They sat, as Perion thought, for the last time together, part of an audience before which the Confraternity of <abbr>St.</abbr> Médard was enacting a masque of <i>The Birth of Hercules</i>. The Bishop of Montors had returned to Bellegarde that evening with his brother, Count Gui, and the pleasure-loving prelate had brought these mirth-makers in his train. Clad in scarlet, he rode before them playing upon a lute⁠—unclerical conduct which shocked his preciser brother and surprised nobody.</p>
			<p id="id00093">In such circumstances Perion began to speak with an odd purpose, because his reason was bedrugged by the beauty and purity of Melicent, and perhaps a little by the slow and clutching music to whose progress the chorus of Theban virgins was dancing. When he had made an end of harsh whispering, Melicent sat for a while in scrupulous appraisement of the rushes. The music was so sweet it seemed to Perion he must go mad unless she spoke within the moment.</p>
			<p id="id00094">Then Melicent said:</p>
			<p id="id00095">“You tell me you are not the Vicomte de Puysange. You tell me you are, instead, the late King Helmas’ servitor, suspected of his murder. You are the fellow that stole the royal jewels⁠—the outlaw for whom half Christendom is searching⁠—”</p>
			<p id="id00096">Thus Melicent began to speak at last; and still he could not intercept those huge and tender eyes whose purple made the thought of heaven comprehensible.</p>
			<p id="id00097">The man replied:</p>
			<p id="id00098">“I am that widely hounded Perion of the Forest. The true vicomte is the wounded rascal over whose delirium we marvelled only last Tuesday. Yes, at the door of your home I attacked him, fought him⁠—hah, but fairly, madame!⁠—and stole his brilliant garments and with them his papers. Then in my desperate necessity I dared to masquerade. For I know enough about dancing to estimate that to dance upon air must necessarily prove to everybody a disgusting performance, but pre-eminently unpleasing to the main actor. Two weeks of safety till the <i>Tranchemer</i> sailed I therefore valued at a perhaps preposterous rate. To-night, as I have said, the ship lies at anchor off Manneville.”</p>
			<p id="id00099">Melicent said an odd thing, asking, “Oh, can it be you are a less despicable person than you are striving to appear!”</p>
			<p id="id00100">“Rather, I am a more unmitigated fool than even I suspected, since when affairs were in a promising train I have elected to blurt out, of all things, the naked and distasteful truth. Proclaim it now; and see the late Vicomte de Puysange lugged out of this hall and after appropriate torture hanged within the month.” And with that Perion laughed.</p>
			<p id="id00101">Thereafter he was silent. As the masque went, Amphitryon had newly returned from warfare, and was singing under Alcmena’s window in the terms of an aubade, a waking-song. “_Rei glorios, verais lums e clardatz⁠—” Amphitryon had begun. Dame Melicent heard him through.</p>
			<p id="id00102">And after many ages, as it seemed to Perion, the soft and brilliant and exquisite mouth was pricked to motion.</p>
			<p id="id00103">“You have affronted, by an incredible imposture and beyond the reach of mercy, every listener in this hall. You have injured me most deeply of all persons here. Yet it is to me alone that you confess.”</p>
			<p id="id00104">Perion leaned forward. You are to understand that, through the incurrent necessities of every circumstance, each of them spoke in whispers, even now. It was curious to note the candid mirth on either side. Mercury was making his adieux to Alcmena’s waiting-woman in the middle of a jig.</p>
			<p id="id00105">“But you,” sneered Perion, “are merciful in all things. Rogue that I am, I dare to build on this notorious fact. I am snared in a hard golden trap, I cannot get a guide to Manneville, I cannot even procure a horse from Count Emmerick’s stables without arousing fatal suspicions; and I must be at Manneville by dawn or else be hanged. Therefore I dare stake all upon one throw; and you must either save or hang me with unwashed hands. As surely as God reigns, my future rests with you. And as I am perfectly aware, you could not live comfortably with a gnat’s death upon your conscience. Eh, am I not a seasoned rascal?”</p>
			<p id="id00106">“Do not remind me now that you are vile,” said Melicent. “Ah, no, not now!”</p>
			<p id="id00107">“Lackey, impostor, and thief!” he sternly answered. “There you have the catalogue of all my rightful titles. And besides, it pleases me, for a reason I cannot entirely fathom, to be unpardonably candid and to fling my destiny into your lap. To-night, as I have said, the <i>Tranchemer</i> lies off Manneville; keep counsel, get me a horse if you will, and to-morrow I am embarked for desperate service under the harried Kaiser of the Greeks, and for throat-cuttings from which I am not likely ever to return. Speak, and I hang before the month is up.”</p>
			<p id="id00108">Dame Melicent looked at him now, and within the moment Perion was repaid, and bountifully, for every folly and misdeed of his entire life.</p>
			<p id="id00109">“What harm have I ever done you, Messire de la Forêt, that you should shame me in this fashion? Until to-night I was not unhappy in the belief I was loved by you. I may say that now without paltering, since you are not the man I thought some day to love. You are but the rind of him. And you would force me to cheat justice, to become a hunted thief’s accomplice, or else to murder you!”</p>
			<p id="id00110">“It comes to that, madame.”</p>
			<p id="id00111">“Then I must help you preserve your life by any sorry stratagems you may devise. I shall not hinder you. I will procure you a guide to Manneville. I will even forgive you all save one offence, since doubtless heaven made you the foul thing you are.” The girl was in a hot and splendid rage. “For you love me. Women know. You love me. You!”</p>
			<p id="id00112">“Undoubtedly, madame.”</p>
			<p id="id00113">“Look into my face! and say what horrid writ of infamy you fancied was apparent there, that my nails may destroy it.”</p>
			<p id="id00114">“I am all base,” he answered, “and yet not so profoundly base as you suppose. Nay, believe me, I had never hoped to win even such scornful kindness as you might accord your lapdog. I have but dared to peep at heaven while I might, and only as lost Dives peeped. Ignoble as I am, I never dreamed to squire an angel down toward the mire and filth which is henceforward my inevitable kennel.”</p>
			<p id="id00115">“The masque is done,” said Melicent, “and yet you talk, and talk, and talk, and mimic truth so cunningly⁠—Well, I will send some trusty person to you. And now, for God’s sake!⁠—nay, for the fiend’s love who is your patron!⁠—let me not ever see you again, Messire de la Forêt.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
