<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>X</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-10" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</h3>
					<h4 epub:type="title">How Demetrios Wooed</h4>
				</hgroup>
				<p>Ahasuerus came and went at will. Nothing was known concerning this soft-treading furtive man except by the proconsul, who had no confidants. By his decree Ahasuerus was an honoured guest at Nacumera. And always the Jew’s eyes when Melicent was near him were as expressionless as the eyes of a snake, which do not ever change.</p>
				<p>Once she told Demetrios that she feared Ahasuerus.</p>
				<p>“But I do not fear him, Melicent, though I have larger reason. For I alone of all men living know the truth concerning this same Jew. Therefore, it amuses me to think that he, who served my wizard father in a very different fashion, is to-day my factor and ciphers over my accounts.”</p>
				<p>Demetrios laughed, and had the Jew summoned.</p>
				<p>This was in the Women’s Garden, where the proconsul sat with Melicent in a little domed pavilion of stone-work which was gilded with red gold and crowned with a cupola of alabaster. Its pavement was of transparent glass, under which were clear running waters wherein swam red and yellow fish.</p>
				<p>Demetrios said:</p>
				<p>“It appears that you are a formidable person, Ahasuerus. My wife here fears you.”</p>
				<p>“Splendour of the Age,” returned Ahasuerus, quietly, “it is notorious that women have long hair and short wits. There is no need to fear a Jew. The Jew, I take it, was created in order that children might evince their playfulness by stoning him, the honest show their common-sense by robbing him, and the religious display their piety by burning him. Who forbids it?”</p>
				<p>“Ey, but my wife is a Christian and in consequence worships a Jew.” Demetrios reflected. His dark eyes twinkled. “What is your opinion concerning this other Jew, Ahasuerus?”</p>
				<p>“I know that He was the Messiah, Lord.”</p>
				<p>“And yet you do not worship Him.”</p>
				<p>The Jew said:</p>
				<p>“It was not altogether worship He desired. He asked that men should love Him. He does not ask love of me.”</p>
				<p>“I find that an obscure saying,” Demetrios considered.</p>
				<p>“It is a true saying, King of Kings. In time it will be made plain. That time is not yet come. I used to pray it would come soon. Now I do not pray any longer. I only wait.”</p>
				<p>Demetrios tugged at his chin, his eyes narrowed, meditating. He laughed.</p>
				<p>Demetrios said:</p>
				<p>“It is no affair of mine. What am I that I am called upon to have prejudices concerning the universe? It is highly probable there are gods of some sort or another, but I do not so far flatter myself as to consider that any possible god would be at all interested in my opinion of him. In any event, I am Demetrios. Let the worst come, and in whatever baleful underworld I find myself imprisoned I shall maintain myself there in a manner not unworthy of Demetrios.” The proconsul shrugged at this point. “I do not find you amusing, Ahasuerus. You may go.”</p>
				<p>“I hear, and I obey,” the Jew replied. He went away patiently.</p>
				<p>Then Demetrios turned toward Melicent, rejoicing that his chattel had golden hair and was comely beyond comparison with all other women he had ever seen.</p>
				<p>Said Demetrios:</p>
				<p>“I love you, Melicent, and you do not love me. Do not be offended because my speech is harsh, for even though I know my candour is distasteful I must speak the truth. You have been obdurate too long, denying Kypris what is due to her. I think that your brain is giddy because of too much exulting in the magnificence of your body and in the number of men who have desired it to their own hurt. I concede your beauty, yet what will it matter a hundred years from now?</p>
				<p>“I admit that my refrain is old. But it will presently take on a more poignant meaning, because a hundred years from now you⁠—even you, dear Melicent!⁠—and all the loveliness which now causes me to estimate life as a light matter in comparison with your love, will be only a bone or two. Your lustrous eyes, which are now more beautiful than it is possible to express, will be unsavoury holes and a worm will crawl through them; and what will it matter a hundred years from now?</p>
				<p>“A hundred years from now should anyone break open our gilded tomb, he will find Melicent to be no more admirable than Demetrios. One skull is like another, and is as lightly split with a mattock. You will be as ugly as I, and nobody will be thinking of your eyes and hair. Hail, rain and dew will drench us both impartially when I lie at your side, as I intend to do, for a hundred years and yet another hundred years. You need not frown, for what will it matter a hundred years from now?</p>
				<p>“Melicent, I offer love and a life that derides the folly of all other manners of living; and even if you deny me, what will it matter a hundred years from now?”</p>
				<p>His face was contorted, his speech had fervent bitterness, for even while he wooed this woman the man internally was raging over his own infatuation.</p>
				<p>And Melicent answered:</p>
				<p>“There can be no question of love between us, seignior. You purchased my body. My body is at your disposal under God’s will.”</p>
				<p>Demetrios sneered, his ardours cooled. He said, “I have already told you, my girl, I do not care for that which can be purchased.”</p>
				<p>In such fashion Melicent abode among these odious persons as a lily which is rooted in mire. She was a prisoner always, and when Demetrios came to Nacumera⁠—which fell about irregularly, for now arose much fighting between the Christians and the pagans⁠—a gem which he uncased, admired, curtly exulted in, and then, jeering at those hot wishes in his heart, locked up untouched when he went back to warfare.</p>
				<p>To her the man was uniformly kind, if with a sort of sneer she could not understand; and he pillaged an infinity of Genoese and Venetian ships⁠—which were notoriously the richest laden⁠—of jewels, veils, silks, furs, embroideries and figured stuffs, wherewith to enhance the comeliness of Melicent. It seemed an all-engulfing madness with this despot daily to aggravate his fierce desire of her, to nurture his obsession, so that he might glory in the consciousness of treading down no puny adversary.</p>
				<p>Pride spurred him on as witches ride their dupes to a foreknown destruction. “Let us have patience,” he would say.</p>
				<p>Meanwhile his other wives peered from screened alcoves at these two and duly hated Melicent. “Let us have patience!” they said, also, but with a meaning that was more sinister.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
