<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXI: How Demetrios Held His Chattel</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-4" id="chapter-21" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">How Demetrios Held His Chattel</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>It is a tale which they narrate in Poictesme, telling how Demetrios returned into the country of the pagans and found all matters there as he had left them. They relate how Melicent was summoned.</p>
			<p>And the tale tells how upon the stairway by which you descended from the Women’s Garden to the citadel⁠—people called it the Queen’s Stairway, because it was builded by Queen Rudabeh very long ago when the Emperor Zal held Nacumera⁠—Demetrios waited with a naked sword. Below were four of his soldiers, picked warriors. This stairway was of white marble, and a sphinx carved in green porphyry guarded each balustrade.</p>
			<p>“Now that we have our audience,” Demetrios said, “come, let the games begin.”</p>
			<p>One of the soldiers spoke. It was that Euthyclos who (as you have heard) had ventured into Christendom at the hazard of his life to rescue the proconsul. Euthyclos was a man of the West Provinces and had followed the fortunes of Demetrios since boyhood.</p>
			<p>“King of the Age,” cried Euthyclos, “it is grim hearing that we must fight with you. But since your will is our will, we must endure this testing, although we find it bitter as aloes and hot as coals. Dear lord and master, none has put food to his lips for whose sake we would harm you willingly, and we shall weep tonight when your ghost passes over and through us.”</p>
			<p>Demetrios answered:</p>
			<p>“Rise up and leave this idleness! It is I that will clip the ends of my hair tonight for the love of you, my stalwart knaves. Such weeping as is done your wounds will perform.”</p>
			<p>At that they addressed themselves to battle, and Melicent perceived she was witnessing no child’s play. The soldiers had attacked in unison, and before the onslaught Demetrios stepped lightly back. But his sword flashed as he moved, and with a grunt Demetrios, leaning far forward, dug deep into the throat of his foremost assailant. The sword penetrated and caught in a link of the gold chain about the fellow’s neck, so that Demetrios was forced to wrench the weapon free, twisting it, as the dying man stumbled backward. Prostrate, the soldier did not cry out, but only writhed and gave a curious bubbling noise as his soul passed.</p>
			<p>“Come,” Demetrios said, “come now, you others, and see what you can win of me. I warn you it will be dearly purchased.”</p>
			<p>And Melicent turned away, hiding her eyes. She was obscurely conscious that a wanton butchery went on, hearing its blows and groans as if from a great distance, while she entreated the Virgin for deliverance from this foul place.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Then a hand fell upon Melicent’s shoulder, rousing her. It was Demetrios. He breathed quickly, but his voice was gentle.</p>
			<p>“It is enough,” he said. “I shall not greatly need Flamberge when I encounter that ruddy innocent who is so dear to you.”</p>
			<p>He broke off. Then he spoke again, half jeering, half wistful. Said Demetrios:</p>
			<p>“I had hoped that you would look on and admire my cunning at swordplay. I was anxious to seem admirable somehow in your eyes⁠ ⁠… I failed. I know very well that I shall always fail. I know that Nacumera will fall, that some day in your native land people will say, ‘That aged woman yonder was once the wife of Demetrios of Anatolia, who was preeminent among the heathen.’ Then they will tell of how I cleft the head of an Emperor who had likened me to Priapos, and how I dragged his successor from behind an arras where he hid from me, to set him upon the throne I did not care to take; and they will tell how for a while great fortune went with me, and I ruled over much land, and was dreaded upon the wide sea, and raised the battlecry in cities that were not my own, fearing nobody. But you will not think of these matters, you will think only of your children’s ailments, of baking and sewing and weaving tapestries, and of directing little household tasks. And the spider will spin her web in my helmet, which will hang as a trophy in the hall of <span xml:lang="fr">Messire de la Forêt</span>.”</p>
			<p>Then he walked beside her into the Women’s Garden, keeping silence for a while. He seemed to deliberate, to reach a decision. All at once Demetrios began to tell of that magnanimous contest which he had fought out in Theodoret’s country with Perion of the Forest.</p>
			<p>“To do the long-legged fellow simple justice,” said the proconsul, as epilogue, “there is no hardier knight alive. I shall always wonder whether or no I would have spared him had the water-demon’s daughter not intervened in his behalf. Yes, I have had some previous dealings with her. Perhaps the less said concerning them, the better.” Demetrios reflected for a while, rather sadly; then his swart face cleared. “Give thanks, my wife, that I have found an enemy who is not unworthy of me. He will come soon, I think, and then we will fight to the death. I hunger for that day.”</p>
			<p>All praise of Perion, however worded, was as wine to Melicent. Demetrios saw as much, noted how the colour in her cheeks augmented delicately, how her eyes grew kindlier. It was his cue. Thereafter Demetrios very often spoke of Perion in that locked palace where no echo of the outer world might penetrate except at the proconsul’s will. He told Melicent, in an unfeigned admiration, of Perion’s courage and activity, declaring that no other captain since the days of those famous generals, Hannibal and Joshua, could lay claim to such preeminence in general estimation; and Demetrios narrated how the Free Companions had ridden through many kingdoms at adventure, serving many lords with valour and always fighting applaudably. To talk of Perion delighted Melicent: it was with such bribes that Demetrios purchased where his riches did not avail; and Melicent no longer avoided him.</p>
			<p>There is scope here for compassion. The man’s love, if it be possible so to call that force which mastered him, had come to be an incessant malady. It poisoned everything, caused him to find his statecraft tedious, his power profitless, and his vices gloomy. But chief of all he fretted over the standards by which the lives of Melicent and Perion were guided. Demetrios thought these criteria comely, he had discovered them to be unshakable, and he despairingly knew that as long as he trusted in the judgment heaven gave him they must always appear to him supremely idiotic. To bring Melicent to his own level or to bring himself to hers was equally impossible. There were moments when he hated her.</p>
			<p>Thus the months passed, and the happenings of another year were chronicled; and as yet neither Perion nor Ayrart de Montors came to Nacumera, and the long plain before the citadel stayed tenantless save for the jackals crying there at night.</p>
			<p>“I wonder that my enemies do not come,” Demetrios said. “It cannot be they have forgotten you and me. That is impossible.” He frowned and sent spies into Christendom.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
