<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>IV: How the Bishop Aided Perion</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-4" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
					<h4 epub:type="title">How the Bishop Aided Perion</h4>
				</hgroup>
				<p>Then at three o’clock, as Perion supposed, someone tapped upon the door. Perion went out into the corridor, which was now unlighted, so that he had to hold to the cloak of Ayrart <span xml:lang="fr">de Montors</span> as the young prelate guided Perion through the complexities of unfamiliar halls and stairways into an inhospitable night. There were ready two horses, and presently the men were mounted and away.</p>
				<p>Once only Perion shifted in the saddle to glance back at Bellegarde, black and formless against an empty sky; and he dared not look again, for the thought of her that lay awake in the Marshal’s Tower, so near at hand as yet, was like a dagger. With set teeth he followed in the wake of his taciturn companion. The bishop never spoke save to growl out some direction.</p>
				<p>Thus they came to Manneville and, skirting the town, came to Fomor Beach, a narrow sandy coast. It was dark in this place and very still save for the encroachment of the tide. Yonder were four little lights, lazily heaving with the water’s motion, to show them where the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship" xml:lang="fr">Tranchemer</i> lay at anchor. It did not seem to Perion that anything mattered.</p>
				<p>“It will be nearing dawn by this,” he said.</p>
				<p>“Ay,” Ayrart <span xml:lang="fr">de Montors</span> said, very briefly; and his tone evinced his willingness to dispense with further conversation. Perion of the Forest was an unclean thing which the bishop must touch in his necessity, but could touch with loathing only, as a thirsty man takes a fly out of his drink. Perion conceded it, because nothing would ever matter any more; and so, the horses tethered, they sat upon the sand in utter silence for the space of a half hour.</p>
				<p>A bird cried somewhere, just once, and with a start Perion knew the night was not quite so murky as it had been, for he could now see a broken line of white, where the tide crept up and shattered and ebbed. Then in a while a light sank tipsily to the water’s level and presently was bobbing in the darkness, apart from those other lights, and it was growing in size and brilliancy.</p>
				<p>Said Perion, “They have sent out the boat.”</p>
				<p>“Ay,” the bishop answered, as before.</p>
				<p>A sort of madness came upon Perion, and it seemed that he must weep, because everything fell out so very ill in this world.</p>
				<p>“<span xml:lang="fr">Messire de Montors</span>, you have aided me. I would be grateful if you permitted it.”</p>
				<p>De Montors spoke at last, saying crisply:</p>
				<p>“Gratitude, I take it, forms no part of the bargain. I am the kinsman of Dame Melicent. It makes for my interest and for the honour of our house that the man whose rooms she visits at night be got out of Poictesme⁠—”</p>
				<p>Said Perion, “You speak in this fashion of the most lovely lady God has made⁠—of her whom the world adores!”</p>
				<p>“Adores!” the bishop answered, with a laugh; “and what poor gull am I to adore an attested wanton?” Then, with a sneer, he spoke of Melicent, and in such terms as are not bettered by repetition.</p>
				<p>Perion said:</p>
				<p>“I am the most unhappy man alive, as surely as you are the most ungenerous. For, look you, in my presence you have spoken infamy of Dame Melicent, though knowing I am in your debt so deeply that I have not the right to resent anything you may elect to say. You have just given me my life; and armoured by the fire-new obligation, you blaspheme an angel, you condescend to buffet a fettered man⁠—”</p>
				<p>But with that his sluggish wits had spied an honest way out of the imbroglio.</p>
				<p>Perion said then, “Draw, <i xml:lang="fr">messire</i>! for, as God lives, I may yet repurchase, at this eleventh hour, the privilege of destroying you.”</p>
				<p>“Heyday! but here is an odd evincement of gratitude!” <span xml:lang="fr">de Montors</span> retorted; “and though I am not particularly squeamish, let me tell you, my fine fellow, I do not ordinarily fight with lackeys.”</p>
				<p>“Nor are you fit to do so, <i xml:lang="fr">messire</i>. Believe me, there is not a lackey in this realm⁠—no, not a cutpurse, nor any pander⁠—who would not in meeting you upon equal footing degrade himself. For you have slandered that which is most perfect in the world; yet lies, <span xml:lang="fr">Messire de Montors</span>, have short legs; and I design within the hour to insure the calumny against an echo.”</p>
				<p>“Rogue, I have given you your very life within the hour⁠—”</p>
				<p>“The fact is undeniable. Thus I must fling the bounty back to you, so that we sorry scoundrels may meet as equals.” Perion wheeled toward the boat, which was now within the reach of wading. “Who is among you? Gaucelm, Roger, Jean Britauz⁠—” He found the man he sought. “Ahasuerus, the captain that was to have accompanied the Free Companions oversea is of another mind. I cede my leadership to Landry <span xml:lang="fr">de Bonnay</span>. You will have the kindness to inform him of the unlooked-for change, and to tender your new captain every appropriate regret and the dying felicitations of Perion <span xml:lang="fr">de la Forêt</span>.”</p>
				<p>He bowed toward the landward twilight, where the sand hillocks were taking form.</p>
				<p>“<span xml:lang="fr">Messire de Montors</span>, we may now resume our vigil. When yonder vessel sails there will be no conceivable happening that can keep breath within my body two weeks longer. I shall be quit of every debt to you. You will then fight with a man already dead if you so elect; but otherwise⁠—if you attempt to flee this place, if you decline to cross swords with a lackey, with a convicted thief, with a suspected murderer, I swear upon my mother’s honour! I will demolish you without compunction, as I would any other vermin.”</p>
				<p>“Oh, brave, brave!” sneered the bishop, “to fling away your life, and perhaps mine too, for an idle word⁠—” But at that he fetched a sob. “How foolish of you! and how like you!” he said, and Perion wondered at this prelate’s voice.</p>
				<p>“Hey, gentlemen!” cried Ayrart <span xml:lang="fr">de Montors</span>, “a moment if you please!” He splashed knee-deep into the icy water, wading to the boat, where he snatched the lantern from the Jew’s hands and fetched this light ashore. He held it aloft, so that Perion might see his face, and Perion perceived that, by some wonder-working, the person in man’s attire who held this light aloft was Melicent. It was odd that Perion always remembered afterward most clearly of all the loosened wisp of hair the wind tossed about her forehead.</p>
				<p>“Look well upon me, Perion,” said Melicent. “Look well, ruined gentleman! look well, poor hunted vagabond! and note how proud I am. Oh, in all things I am very proud! A little I exult in my high station and in my wealth, and, yes, even in my beauty, for I know that I am beautiful, but it is the chief of all my honours that you love me⁠—and so foolishly!”</p>
				<p>“You do not understand⁠—!” cried Perion.</p>
				<p>“Rather I understand at last that you are in sober verity a lackey, an impostor, and a thief, even as you said. Ay, a lackey to your honour! an imposter that would endeavour⁠—and, oh, so very vainly!⁠—to impersonate another’s baseness! and a thief that has stolen another person’s punishment! I ask no questions; loving means trusting; but I would like to kill that other person very, very slowly. I ask no questions, but I dare to trust the man I know of, even in defiance of that man’s own voice. I dare protest the man no thief, but in all things a madly honourable gentleman. My poor bruised, puzzled boy,” said Melicent, with an odd mirthful tenderness, “how came you to be blundering about this miry world of ours! Only be very good for my sake and forget the bitterness; what does it matter when there is happiness, too?”</p>
				<p>He answered nothing, but it was not because of misery.</p>
				<p>“Come, come, will you not even help me into the boat?” said Melicent.<br/>
				She, too, was glad.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
