<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXVI: How Men Ordered Matters</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-4" id="chapter-26" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">How Men Ordered Matters</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Orestes came into the garden with Ahasuerus and nine other attendants. The master of Nacumera did not speak a syllable while his retainers seized Callistion, gagged her, and tied her hands with cords. They silently removed her. One among them bore on his shoulders the slim corpse of Diophantus, which was interred the same afternoon (with every appropriate ceremony) in company with that of his father. Orestes had the nicest sense of etiquette.</p>
			<p>This series of swift deeds was performed with such a glib precipitancy that if was as though the action had been rehearsed a score of times. The garden was all drowsy peace now that Orestes spread his palms in a gesture of deprecation. A little distance from him, Ahasuerus with his forefinger drew upon the water’s surface designs which appeared to amuse the Jew.</p>
			<p>“She would have killed you, Melicent,” Orestes said, “though all Olympos had marshalled in interdiction. That would have been irreligious. Moreover, by Hercules! I have not time to choose sides between snarling women. He who hunts with cats will catch mice. I aim more highly. And besides, by an incredible forced march, this <span xml:lang="fr">Comte de la Forêt</span> and all his Free Companions are battering at the gates of Nacumera⁠—”</p>
			<p>Hope blazed. “You know that were I harmed he would spare no one. Your troops are all at Calonak. Oh, God is very good!” said Melicent.</p>
			<p>“I do not asperse the deities of any nation. It is unlucky. None the less, your desires outpace your reason. Grant that I had not more than fifty men to defend the garrison, yet Nacumera is impregnable except by starvation. We can sit snug a month. Meanwhile our main force is at Calonak, undoubtedly. Yet my infatuated father had already recalled these troops, in order that they might escort you into <span xml:lang="fr">Messire de la Forêt</span>’s camp. Now I shall use these knaves quite otherwise. They will arrive within two days, and to the rear of <span xml:lang="fr">Messire de la Forêt</span>, who is encamped before an impregnable fortress. To the front unscalable walls, and behind him, at a moderate computation, three swords to his one. All this in a valley from which Daedalos might possibly escape, but certainly no other man. I count this Perion of the Forest as already dead.”</p>
			<p>It was a lumbering Orestes who proclaimed each step in his enchained deductions by the descent of a blunt forefinger upon the palm of his left hand. Demetrios had left a son but not an heir.</p>
			<p>Yet the chain held. Melicent tested every link and found each obdurate. She foresaw it all. Perion would be surrounded and overpowered. “And these troops come from Calonak because of me!”</p>
			<p>“Things fall about with an odd patness, as you say. It should teach you not to talk about divinities lightly. Also, by this Jew’s advice, I mean to further the gods’ indisputable work. You will appear upon the walls of Nacumera at dawn tomorrow, in such a garb as you wore in your native country when the <span xml:lang="fr">Comte de la Forêt</span> first saw you. Ahasuerus estimates this Perion will not readily leave pursuit of you in that event, whatever his lieutenants urge, for you are very beautiful.”</p>
			<p>Melicent cried aloud, “A bitter curse this beauty has been to me, and to all men who have desired it.”</p>
			<p>“But I do not desire it,” said Orestes. “Else I would not have sold it to Ahasuerus. I desire only the governorship of some province on the frontier where I may fight daily with stalwart adversaries, and ride past the homes of conquered persons who hate me. Ahasuerus here assures me that the Emperor will not deny me such employment when I bring him the head of <span xml:lang="fr">Messire de la Forêt</span>. The raids of <span xml:lang="fr">Messire de la Forêt</span> have irreligiously annoyed our Emperor for a long while.”</p>
			<p>She muttered, “Thou that once wore a woman’s body⁠—!”</p>
			<p>“⁠—And I take Ahasuerus to be shrewd in all respects save one. For he desires trivialities. A wise man knows that woman are the sauce and not the meat of life; Ahasuerus, therefore, is not wise. And in consequence I do not lack a handsome bribe for this Bathyllos whom our good Emperor⁠—misguided man!⁠—is weak enough to love; my mother goes in chains; and I shall get my province.”</p>
			<p>Here Orestes laughed. And then the master of Nacumera left Dame Melicent alone with Ahasuerus.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
