<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-22" epub:type="chapter">
			<p id="id00359" style="margin-top: 4em">11.</p>
			<p id="id00360" style="margin-top: 2em">
				<i>How Time Sped with Perion</i>
			</p>
			<p id="id00361">It is a tale which they narrate in Poictesme, telling of what befell Perion de la Forêt after he had been ransomed out of heathenry. They tell how he took service with the King of Cyprus. And the tale tells how the King of Cyprus was defeated at sea by the Emir of Arsuf; and how Perion came unhurt from that battle, and by land relieved the garrison at Japhe, and was ennobled therefor; and was afterward called the Comte de la Forêt.</p>
			<p id="id00362">Then the King of Cyprus made peace with heathendom, and Perion left him. Now Perion’s skill in warfare was leased to whatsoever lord would dare contend against Demetrios and the proconsul’s magic sword Flamberge: and Perion of the Forest did not inordinately concern himself as to the merits of any quarrel because of which battalions died, so long as he fought toward Melicent. Demetrios was pleased, and thrilled with the heroic joy of an athlete who finds that he unwittingly has grappled with his equal.</p>
			<p id="id00363">So the duel between these two dragged on with varying fortunes, and the years passed, and neither duellist had conquered as yet. Then King Theodoret, third of that name to rule, and once (as you have heard) a wooer of Dame Melicent, declared a crusade; and Perion went to him at Lacre Kai. It was in making this journey, they say, that Perion passed through Pseudopolis, and had speech there with Queen Helen, the delight of gods and men: and Perion conceded this Queen was well-enough to look at.</p>
			<p id="id00364">“She reminds me, indeed, of that Dame Melicent whom I serve in this world, and trust to serve in Paradise,” said Perion. “But Dame Melicent has a mole on her left cheek.”</p>
			<p id="id00365">“That is a pity,” said an attendant lord. “A mole disfigures a pretty woman.”</p>
			<p id="id00366">“I was speaking, messire, of Dame Melicent.”</p>
			<p id="id00367">“Even so,” the lord replied, “a mole is a blemish.”</p>
			<p id="id00368">“I cannot permit these observations,” said Perion. So they fought, and<br/>
			Perion killed his opponent, and left Pseudopolis that afternoon.<br/></p>
			<p id="id00369">Such was Perion’s way.</p>
			<p id="id00370">He came unhurt to King Theodoret, who at once recognised in the famous Comte de la Forêt the former Vicomte de Puysange, but gave no sign of such recognition.</p>
			<p id="id00371">“Heaven chooses its own instruments,” the pious King reflected: “and this swaggering Comte de la Forêt, who affects so many names has also the name of being a warrior without any peer in Christendom. Let us first conquer this infamous proconsul, this adversary of our Redeemer, and then we shall see. It may be that heaven will then permit me to detect this Comte de la Forêt in some particularly abominable heresy. For this long-legged ruffian looks like a schismatic, and would singularly grace a rack.”</p>
			<p id="id00372">So King Theodoret kissed Perion upon both cheeks, and created him generalissimo of King Theodoret’s forces. It was upon St. George’s day that Perion set sail with thirty-four ships of great dimensions and admirable swiftness.</p>
			<p id="id00373">“Do you bring me back Demetrios in chains,” said the King, fondling<br/>
			Perion at parting, “and all that I have is yours.”<br/></p>
			<p id="id00374">“I mean to bring back my stolen wife, Dame Melicent,” was Perion’s reply: “and if I can manage it I shall also bring you this Demetrios, in return for lending me these ships and soldiers.”</p>
			<p id="id00375">“Do you think,” the King asked, peevishly, “that monarchs nowadays fit out armaments to replevin a woman who is no longer young, and who was always stupid?”</p>
			<p id="id00376">“I cannot permit these observations⁠—” said Perion.</p>
			<p id="id00377">Theodoret hastily explained that his was merely a general observation, without any personal bearing.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
