<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XIV: How Perion Braved Theodoret</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-3" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-14" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</h3>
					<h4 epub:type="title">How Perion Braved Theodoret</h4>
				</hgroup>
				<p>The city of Megaris (then Theodoret’s capital) was ablaze with bonfires on the night that the <span xml:lang="fr">Comte de la Forêt</span> entered it at the head of his forces. Demetrios, meanly clothed, his hands tied behind him, trudged sullenly beside his conqueror’s horse. Yet of the two the gloomier face showed below the count’s coronet, for Perion did not relish the impendent interview with King Theodoret. They came thus amid much shouting to the <span xml:lang="fr">Hôtel d’Ebelin</span>, their assigned quarters, and slept there.</p>
				<p>Next morning, about the hour of prime, two men-at-arms accompanied a fettered Demetrios into the presence of King Theodoret. Perion of the Forest preceded them. He pardonably swaggered, in spite of his underlying uneasiness, for this last feat, as he could not ignore, was a performance which Christendom united to applaud.</p>
				<p>They came thus into a spacious chamber, very inadequately lighted. The walls were unhewn stone. There was but one window, of uncoloured glass; and it was guarded by iron bars. The floor was bare of rushes. On one side was a bed with tattered hangings of green, which were adorned with rampant lions worked in silver thread much tarnished; to the right hand stood a prie-dieu. Between these isolated articles of furniture, and behind an unpainted table sat, in a high-backed chair, a wizen and shabbily-clad old man. This was Theodoret, most pious and penurious of monarchs. In attendance upon him were Fra Battista, prior of the Grey Monks, and Melicent’s near kinsman, once the Bishop, now the Cardinal, <span xml:lang="fr">de Montors</span>, who, as was widely known, was the actual monarch of this realm. The latter was smartly habited as a cavalier and showed in nothing like a churchman.</p>
				<p>The infirm King arose and came to meet the champion who had performed what many generals of Christendom had vainly striven to achieve. He embraced the conqueror of Demetrios as one does an equal.</p>
				<p>Said Theodoret:</p>
				<p>“Hail, my fair friend! you who have lopped the right arm of heathenry! To-day, I know, the saints hold festival in heaven. I cannot recompense you, since God alone is omnipotent. Yet ask now what you will, short of my crown, and it is yours.” The old man kissed the chief of all his treasures, a bit of the True Cross, which hung upon his breast supported by a chain of gold.</p>
				<p>“The King has spoken,” Perion returned. “I ask the life of Demetrios.”</p>
				<p>Theodoret recoiled, like a small flame which is fluttered by its kindler’s breath. He cackled thinly, saying:</p>
				<p>“A jest or so is privileged in this high hour. Yet we ought not to make a jest of matters which concern the Church. Am I not right, Ayrart? Oh, no, this merciless Demetrios is assuredly that very Antichrist whose coming was foretold. I must relinquish him to Mother Church, in order that he may be equitably tried, and be baptised⁠—since even he may have a soul⁠—and afterward be burned in the market-place.”</p>
				<p>“The King has spoken,” Perion replied. “I too have spoken.”</p>
				<p>There was a pause of horror upon the part of King Theodoret. He was at first in a mere whirl. Theodoret said:</p>
				<p>“You ask, in earnest, for the life of this Demetrios, this arch-foe of our Redeemer, this spawn of Satan, who has sacked more of my towns than I have fingers on this wasted hand! Now, now that God has singularly favoured me⁠—!” Theodoret snarled and gibbered like a frenzied ape, and had no longer the ability to articulate.</p>
				<p>“Beau sire, I fought the man because he infamously held Dame Melicent, whom I serve in this world without any reservation, and trust to serve in Paradise. His person, and this alone, will ransom Melicent.”</p>
				<p>“You plan to loose this fiend!” the old King cried. “To stir up all this butchery again!”</p>
				<p>“Sire, pray recall how long I have loved Melicent. Reflect that if you slay Demetrios, Dame Melicent will be left destitute in heathenry. Remember that she will be murdered through the hatred of this man’s other wives whom her inestimable beauty has supplanted.” Thus Perion entreated.</p>
				<p>All this while the cardinal and the proconsul had been appraising each other. It was as though they two had been the only persons in the dimly-lit apartment. They had not met before. “Here is my match,” thought each of these two; “here, if the world affords it, is my peer in cunning and bravery.”</p>
				<p>And each lusted for a contest, and with something of mutual comprehension.</p>
				<p>In consequence they stinted pity for Theodoret, who unfeignedly believed that whether he kept or broke his recent oath damnation was inevitable. “You have been ill-advised⁠—” he stammered. “I do not dare release Demetrios⁠—My soul would answer that enormity⁠—But it was sworn upon the Cross⁠—Oh, ruin either way! Come now, my gallant captain,” the King barked. “I have gold, lands, and jewels⁠—”</p>
				<p>“Beau sire, I have loved this my dearest lady since the time when both of us were little more than children, and each day of the year my love for her has been doubled. What would it avail me to live in however lofty estate when I cannot daily see the treasure of my life?”</p>
				<p>Now the Cardinal <span xml:lang="fr">de Montors</span> interrupted, and his voice was to the ear as silk is to the fingers.</p>
				<p>“Beau sire,” said Ayrart <span xml:lang="fr">de Montors</span>, “I speak in all appropriate respect. But you have sworn an oath which no man living may presume to violate.”</p>
				<p>“Oh, true, Ayrart!” the fluttered King assented. “This blusterer holds me as in a vise.” He turned to Perion again, fierce, tense and fragile, like an angered cat. “Choose now! I will make you the wealthiest person in my realm⁠—My son, I warn you that since Adam’s time women have been the devil’s peculiar bait. See now, I am not angry. Heh, I remember, too, how beautiful she was. I was once tempted much as you are tempted. So I pardon you. I will give you my daughter Ermengarde in marriage, I will make you my heir, I will give you half my kingdom⁠—” His voice rose, quavering; and it died now, for he foreread the damnation of Theodoret’s soul while he fawned before this impassive Perion.</p>
				<p>“Since Love has taken up his abode within my heart,” said Perion, “there has not ever been a vacancy therein for any other thought. How may I help it if Love recompenses my hospitality by afflicting me with a desire which can neither subdue the world nor be subdued by it?”</p>
				<p>Theodoret continued like the rustle of dead leaves:</p>
				<p>“⁠—Else I must keep my oath. In that event you may depart with this unbeliever. I will accord you twenty-four hours wherein to accomplish this. But, oh, if I lay hands upon either of you within the twenty-fifth hour I will not kill my prisoner at once. For first I must devise unheard-of torments⁠—”</p>
				<p>The King’s face was not agreeable to look upon.</p>
				<p>Yet Perion encountered it with an untroubled gaze until Battista spoke, saying:</p>
				<p>“I promise worse. The Book will be cast down, the bells be tolled, and all the candles snuffed⁠—ah, very soon!” Battista licked his lips, gingerly, just as a cat does.</p>
				<p>Then Perion was moved, since excommunication is more terrible than death to any of the Church’s loyal children, and he was now more frightened than the King. And so Perion thought of Melicent a while before he spoke.</p>
				<p>Said Perion:</p>
				<p>“I choose. I choose hell fire in place of riches and honour, and I demand the freedom of Demetrios.”</p>
				<p>“Go!” the King said. “Go hence, blasphemer. Hah, you will weep for this in hell. I pray that I may hear you then, and laugh as I do now⁠—”</p>
				<p>He went away, and was followed by Battista, who whispered of a makeshift. The cardinal remained and saw to it that the chains were taken from Demetrios.</p>
				<p>“In consequence of <span xml:lang="fr">Messire de la Forêt</span>’s⁠—as I must term it⁠—most unchristian decision,” said the cardinal, “it is not impossible, <span xml:lang="fr">Messire</span> the Proconsul, that I may head the next assault upon your territory⁠—”</p>
				<p>Demetrios laughed. He said:</p>
				<p>“I dare to promise your Eminence that reception you would most enjoy.”</p>
				<p>“I had hoped for as much,” the cardinal returned; and he too laughed. To do him justice, he did not know of Battista’s makeshift.</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>The cardinal remained when they had gone. Seated in a king’s chair, Ayrart <span xml:lang="fr">de Montors</span> meditated rather wistfully upon that old time when he, also, had loved Melicent whole-heartedly. It seemed a great while ago, made him aware of his maturity.</p>
				<p>He had put love out of his life, in common with all other weaknesses which might conceivably hinder the advancement of Ayrart <span xml:lang="fr">de Montors</span>. In consequence, he had climbed far. He was not dissatisfied. It was a man’s business to make his way in the world, and he had done this.</p>
				<p>“My cousin is a brave girl, though,” he said aloud, “I must certainly do what I can to effect her rescue as soon as it is convenient to send another expedition against Demetrios.”</p>
				<p>Then the cardinal set about concoction of a moving sonnet in praise of <span xml:lang="it">Monna Vittoria de’ Pazzi</span>. Desperation loaned him extraordinary eloquence (as he complacently reflected) in addressing this obdurate woman, who had held out against his love-making for six weeks now.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
