<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXXVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-36" epub:type="chapter">
			<p id="id00672" style="margin-top: 4em">24.</p>
			<p id="id00673" style="margin-top: 2em">
				<i>How Orestes Ruled</i>
			</p>
			<p id="id00674">Melicent returned into the Court of Stars; and as she entered, Orestes lifted one of the red cushions from Demetrios’ face. The eyes of Ahasuerus, who stood by negligently, were as expressionless as the eyes of a snake.</p>
			<p id="id00675">“The great proconsul laid an inconvenient mandate upon me,” said Orestes. “The great proconsul has been removed from us in order that his splendour may enhance the glories of Elysium.”</p>
			<p id="id00676">She saw that the young man had smothered his own father in the flesh as Demetrios lay helpless; and knew thereby that Orestes was indeed the son of Demetrios.</p>
			<p id="id00677">“Go,” this Orestes said thereafter; “go, and remember I am master here.”</p>
			<p id="id00678">Said Melicent, “And by which door?” A little hope there was as yet.</p>
			<p id="id00679">But he, as half in shame, had pointed to the entrance of the Women’s<br/>
			Garden. “I have no enmity against you, outlander. Yet my mother desires<br/>
			to talk with you. Also there is some bargaining to be completed with<br/>
			Ahasuerus here.”<br/></p>
			<p id="id00680">Then Melicent knew what had prompted the proconsul’s murder. It seemed unfair Callistion should hate her with such bitterness; yet Melicent remembered certain thoughts concerning Dame Mélusine, and did not wonder at Callistion’s mania half so much as did Callistion’s son.</p>
			<p id="id00681">“I must endure discomfort and, it may be, torture for a little longer,” said Melicent, and laughed whole-heartedly. “Oh, but to-day I find a cure for every ill,” said Melicent; and thereupon she left Orestes as a princess should.</p>
			<p id="id00682">But first she knelt by that which yesterday had been her master.</p>
			<p id="id00683">“I have no word of praise or blame to give you in farewell. You were not admirable, Demetrios. But you depart upon a fearful journey, and in my heart there is just memory of the long years wherein according to your fashion you were kind to me. A bargain is a bargain. I sold with open eyes that which you purchased. I may not reproach you.”</p>
			<p id="id00684">Then Melicent lifted the dead face between her hands, as mothers caress their boys in questioning them.</p>
			<p id="id00685">“I would I had done this when you were living,” said Melicent, “because I understand now that you loved me in your fashion. And I pray that you may know I am the happiest woman in the world, because I think this knowledge would now gladden you. I go to slavery, Demetrios, where I was queen, I go to hardship, and it may be that I go to death. But I have learned this assuredly⁠—that love endures, that the strong knot which unites my heart and Perion’s heart can never be untied. Oh, living is a higher thing than you or I had dreamed! And I have in my heart just pity, poor Demetrios, for you who never found the love of which I must endeavour to be worthy. A curse was I to you unwillingly, as you⁠—I now believe⁠—have been to me against your will. So at the last I turn anew to bargaining, and cry⁠—in your deaf ears⁠—<i>Pardon for pardon, O Demetrios!</i>”</p>
			<p id="id00686">Then Melicent kissed pitiable lips which would not ever sneer again, and, rising, passed into the Women’s Garden, proudly and unafraid.</p>
			<p id="id00687">Ahasuerus shrugged so patiently that she was half afraid. Then, as a cloud passes, she saw that all further buffetings would of necessity be trivial.</p>
			<p id="id00688">For Perion, as she now knew, was very near to her⁠—single of purpose, clean of hands, and filled with such a love as thrilled her with delicious fears of her own poor unworthiness.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
