<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>VIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-8" epub:type="chapter">
			<p id="id00276" style="margin-top: 4em">8.</p>
			<p id="id00277" style="margin-top: 2em">
				<i>How Demetrios Was Amused</i>
			</p>
			<p id="id00278">Now Melicent abode in the house of Demetrios, whom she had not seen since the morning after he had wedded her. A month had passed. As yet she could not understand the language of her fellow prisoners, but Halaon, a eunuch who had once served a cardinal in Tuscany, informed her the proconsul was in the West Provinces, where an invading force had landed under Ranulph de Meschines.</p>
			<p id="id00279">A month had passed. She woke one night from dreams of Perion⁠—what else should women dream of?⁠—and found the same Ahasuerus that had brought her news of Perion’s captivity, so long ago, attendant at her bedside.</p>
			<p id="id00280">He seemed a prey to some half-scornful mirth. In speech, at least, the man was of entire discretion. “The Splendour of the World desires your presence, madame.” Thus the Jew blandly spoke.</p>
			<p id="id00281">She cried, aghast at so much treachery, “You had planned this!”</p>
			<p id="id00282">He answered:</p>
			<p id="id00283">“I plan always. Oh, certainly, I must weave always as the spider does.⁠ ⁠… Meanwhile time passes. I, like you, am now the servitor of Demetrios. I am his factor now at Calonak. I buy and sell. I estimate ounces. I earn my wages. Who forbids it?” Here the Jew shrugged. “And to conclude, the Splendour of the World desires your presence, madame.”</p>
			<p id="id00284">He seemed to get much joy of this mouth-filling periphrasis as sneeringly he spoke of their common master.</p>
			<p id="id00285">* * * * *</p>
			<p id="id00286">Now Melicent, in a loose robe of green Coan stuff shot through and through with a radiancy like that of copper, followed the thin, smiling Jew Ahasuerus. She came thus with bare feet into the Court of Stars, where the proconsul lay on the divan as though he had not ever moved from there. To-night he was clothed in scarlet, and barbaric ornaments dangled from his pierced ears. These glittered now that his head moved a little as he silently dismissed Ahasuerus from the Court of Stars.</p>
			<p id="id00287">Real stars were overhead, so brilliant and (it seemed) so near they turned the fountain’s jet into a spurt of melting silver. The moon was set, but there was a flaring lamp of iron, high as a man’s shoulder, yonder where Demetrios lay.</p>
			<p id="id00288">“Stand close to it, my wife,” said the proconsul, “in order that I may see my newest purchase very clearly.”</p>
			<p id="id00289">She obeyed him; and she esteemed the sacrifice, however unendurable, which bought for Perion the chance to serve God and his love for her by valorous and commendable actions to be no cause for grief.</p>
			<p id="id00290">“I think with those old men who sat upon the walls of Troy,” Demetrios said, and he laughed because his voice had shaken a little. “Meanwhile I have returned from crucifying a hundred of your fellow worshippers,” Demetrios continued. His speech had an odd sweetness. “Ey, yes, I conquered at Yroga. It was a good fight. My horse’s hoofs were red at its conclusion. My surviving opponents I consider to have been deplorable fools when they surrendered, for people die less painfully in battle. There was one fellow, a Franciscan monk, who hung six hours upon a palm tree, always turning his head from one side to the other. It was amusing.”</p>
			<p id="id00291">She answered nothing.</p>
			<p id="id00292">“And I was wondering always how I would feel were you nailed in his place. It was curious I should have thought of you.⁠ ⁠… But your white flesh is like the petals of a flower. I suppose it is as readily destructible. I think you would not long endure.”</p>
			<p id="id00293">“I pray God hourly that I may not!” said tense Melicent.</p>
			<p id="id00294">He was pleased to have wrung one cry of anguish from this lovely effigy. He motioned her to him and laid one hand upon her naked breast. He gave a gesture of distaste.</p>
			<p id="id00295">Demetrios said:</p>
			<p id="id00296">“No, you are not afraid. However, you are very beautiful. I thought that you would please me more when your gold hair had grown a trifle longer. There is nothing in the world so beautiful as golden hair. Its beauty weathers even the commendation of poets.”</p>
			<p id="id00297">No power of motion seemed to be in this white girl, but certainly you could detect no fear. Her clinging robe shone like an opal in the lamplight, her body, only partly veiled, was enticing, and her visage was very lovely. Her wide-open eyes implored you, but only as those of a trapped animal beseech the mercy for which it does not really hope. Thus Melicent waited in the clear lamplight, with no more wavering in her face than you may find in the next statue’s face.</p>
			<p id="id00298">In the man’s heart woke now some comprehension of the nature of her love for Perion, of that high and alien madness which dared to make of Demetrios of Anatolia’s will an unavoidable discomfort, and no more. The prospect was alluring. The proconsul began to chuckle as water pours from a jar, and the gold in his ears twinkled.</p>
			<p id="id00299">“Decidedly I shall get much mirth of you. Go back to your own rooms. I had thought the world afforded no adversary and no game worthy of Demetrios. I have found both. Therefore, go back to your own rooms,” he gently said.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
