<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>III: How Melicent Wooed</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-1" id="chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">How Melicent Wooed</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Then Perion knew that vain regret had turned his brain, very certainly, for it seemed the door had opened and Dame Melicent herself had come, warily, into the panelled gloomy room. It seemed that Melicent paused in the convulsive brilliancy of the firelight, and stayed thus with vaguely troubled eyes like those of a child newly wakened from sleep.</p>
			<p>And it seemed a long while before she told Perion very quietly that she had confessed all to Ayrart <span xml:lang="fr">de Montors</span>, and had, by reason of <span xml:lang="fr">de Montors</span>’ love for her, so goaded and allured the outcome of their talk⁠—“ignobly,” as she said⁠—that a clean-handed gentleman would come at three o’clock for Perion <span xml:lang="fr">de la Forêt</span>, and guide a thief toward unmerited impunity. All this she spoke quite levelly, as one reads aloud from a book; and then, with a signal change of voice, Melicent said: “Yes, that is true enough. Yet why, in reality, do you think I have in my own person come to tell you of it?”</p>
			<p>“Madame, I may not guess. Hah, indeed, indeed,” Perion cried, because he knew the truth and was unspeakably afraid, “I dare not guess!”</p>
			<p>“You sail tomorrow for the fighting oversea⁠—” she began, but her sweet voice trailed and died into silence. He heard the crepitations of the fire, and even the hurried beatings of his own heart, as against a terrible and lovely hush of all created life. “Then take me with you.”</p>
			<p>Perion had never any recollection of what he answered. Indeed, he uttered no communicative words, but only foolish babblements.</p>
			<p>“Oh, I do not understand,” said Melicent. “It is as though some spell were laid upon me. Look you, I have been cleanly reared, I have never wronged any person that I know of, and throughout my quiet, sheltered life I have loved truth and honour most of all. My judgment grants you to be what you are confessedly. And there is that in me more masterful and surer than my judgment, that which seems omniscient and lightly puts aside your confessings as unimportant.”</p>
			<p>“Lackey, impostor, and thief!” young Perion answered. “There you have the catalogue of all my rightful titles fairly earned.”</p>
			<p>“And even if I believed you, I think I would not care! Is that not strange? For then I should despise you. And even then, I think, I would fling my honour at your feet, as I do now, and but in part with loathing, I would still entreat you to make of me your wife, your servant, anything that pleased you.⁠ ⁠… Oh, I had thought that when love came it would be sweet!”</p>
			<p>Strangely quiet, in every sense, he answered:</p>
			<p>“It is very sweet. I have known no happier moment in my life. For you stand within arm’s reach, mine to touch, mine to possess and do with as I elect. And I dare not lift a finger. I am as a man that has lain for a long while in a dungeon vainly hungering for the glad light of day⁠—who, being freed at last, must hide his eyes from the dear sunlight he dare not look upon as yet. Ho, I am past speech unworthy of your notice! and I pray you now speak harshly with me, madame, for when your pure eyes regard me kindly, and your bright and delicate lips have come thus near to mine, I am so greatly tempted and so happy that I fear lest heaven grow jealous!”</p>
			<p>“Be not too much afraid⁠—” she murmured.</p>
			<p>“Nay, should I then be bold? and within the moment wake Count Emmerick to say to him, very boldly, ‘Beau sire, the thief half Christendom is hunting has the honour to request your sister’s hand in marriage’?”</p>
			<p>“You sail tomorrow for the fighting oversea. Take me with you.”</p>
			<p>“Indeed the feat would be worthy of me. For you are a lady tenderly nurtured and used to every luxury the age affords. There comes to woo you presently an excellent and potent monarch, not all unworthy of your love, who will presently share with you many happy and honourable years. Yonder is a lawless naked wilderness where I and my fellow desperadoes hope to cheat offended justice and to preserve thrice-forfeited lives in savagery. You bid me aid you to go into this country, never to return! Madame, if I obeyed you, Satan would protest against pollution of his ageless fires by any soul so filthy.”</p>
			<p>“You talk of little things, whereas I think of great things. Love is not sustained by palatable food alone, and is not served only by those persons who go about the world in satin.”</p>
			<p>“Then take the shameful truth. It is undeniable I swore I loved you, and with appropriate gestures, too. But, <i xml:lang="und">dompnedex</i>, madame! I am past master in these specious ecstasies, for somehow I have rarely seen the woman who had not some charm or other to catch my heart with. I confess now that you alone have never quickened it. My only purpose was through hyperbole to wheedle you out of a horse, and meanwhile to have my recreation, you handsome jade!⁠—and that is all you ever meant to me. I swear to you that is all, all, all!” sobbed Perion, for it appeared that he must die. “I have amused myself with you, I have abominably tricked you⁠—”</p>
			<p>Melicent only waited with untroubled eyes which seemed to plumb his heart and to appraise all which Perion had ever thought or longed for since the day that Perion was born; and she was as beautiful, it seemed to him, as the untroubled, gracious angels are, and more compassionate.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” Perion said, “I am trying to lie to you. And even at lying I fail.”</p>
			<p>She said, with a wonderful smile:</p>
			<p>“Assuredly there were never any other persons so mad as we. For I must do the wooing, as though you were the maid, and all the while you rebuff me and suffer so that I fear to look on you. Men say you are no better than a highwayman; you confess yourself to be a thief: and I believe none of your accusers. Perion <span xml:lang="fr">de la Forêt</span>,” said Melicent, and ballad-makers have never shaped a phrase wherewith to tell you of her voice, “I know that you have dabbled in dishonour no more often than an archangel has pilfered drying linen from a hedgerow. I do not guess, for my hour is upon me, and inevitably I know! and there is nothing dares to come between us now.”</p>
			<p>“Nay⁠—ho, and even were matters as you suppose them, without any warrant⁠—there is at least one silly stumbling knave that dares as much. Saith he: ‘What is the most precious thing in the world?⁠—Why, assuredly, Dame Melicent’s welfare. Let me get the keeping of it, then. For I have been entrusted with a host of common priceless things⁠—with youth and vigour and honour, with a clean conscience and a child’s faith, and so on⁠—and no person alive has squandered them more gallantly. So heartward ho! and trust me now, my timorous yoke-fellow, to win and squander also the chiefest jewel of the world.’ Eh, thus he chuckles and nudges me, with wicked whisperings. Indeed, madame, this rascal that shares equally in my least faculty is a most pitiful, ignoble rogue! and he has aforetime eked out our common livelihood by such practices as your unsullied imagination could scarcely depicture. Until I knew you I had endured him. But you have made of him a horror. A horror, a horror! a thing too pitiful for hell!”</p>
			<p>Perion turned away from her, groaning. He flung himself into a chair. He screened his eyes as if before some physical abomination.</p>
			<p>The girl kneeled close to him, touching him.</p>
			<p>“My dear, my dear! then slay for me this other Perion of the Forest.”</p>
			<p>And Perion laughed, not very mirthfully.</p>
			<p>“It is the common usage of women to ask of men this little labour, which is a harder task than ever Hercules, that mighty-muscled king of heathenry, achieved. Nay, I, for all my sinews, am an attested weakling. The craft of other men I do not fear, for I have encountered no formidable enemy save myself; but that same midnight stabber unhorsed me long ago. I had wallowed in the mire contentedly enough until you came.⁠ ⁠… Ah, child, child! why needed you to trouble me! for tonight I want to be clean as you are clean, and that I may not ever be. I am garrisoned with devils, I am the battered plaything of every vice, and I lack the strength, and it may be, even the will, to leave my mire. Always I have betrayed the stewardship of man and god alike that my body might escape a momentary discomfort! And loving you as I do, I cannot swear that in the outcome I would not betray you too, to this same end! I cannot swear⁠—Oh, now let Satan laugh, yet not unpitifully, since he and I, alone, know all the reasons why I may not swear! Hah, Madame Melicent!” cried Perion, in his great agony, “you offer me that gift an emperor might not accept save in awed gratitude; and I refuse it.” Gently he raised her to her feet. “And now, in God’s name, go, madame, and leave the prodigal among his husks.”</p>
			<p>“You are a very brave and foolish gentleman,” she said, “who chooses to face his own achievements without any paltering. To every man, I think, that must be bitter work; to the woman who loves him it is impossible.”</p>
			<p>Perion could not see her face, because he lay prone at the feet of Melicent, sobbing, but without any tears, and tasting very deeply of such grief and vain regret as, he had thought, they know in hell alone; and even after she had gone, in silence, he lay in this same posture for an exceedingly long while.</p>
			<p>And after he knew not how long a while, Perion propped his chin between his hands and, still sprawling upon the rushes, stared hard into the little, crackling fire. He was thinking of a Perion <span xml:lang="fr">de la Forêt</span> that once had been. In him might have been found a fit mate for Melicent had this boy not died very long ago.</p>
			<p>It is no more cheerful than any other mortuary employment, this disinterment of the person you have been, and are not any longer; and so did Perion find his cataloguing of irrevocable old follies and evasions.</p>
			<p>Then Perion arose and looked for pen and ink. It was the first letter he ever wrote to Melicent, and, as you will presently learn, she never saw it.</p>
			<p>In such terms Perion wrote:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>“<b epub:type="z3998:salutation">Madame</b>⁠—It may please you to remember that when Dame Mélusine and I were interrogated, I freely confessed to the murder of King Helmas and the theft of my dead master’s jewels. In that I lied. For it was my manifest duty to save the woman whom, as I thought, I loved, and it was apparent that the guilty person was either she or I.</p>
				<p>“She is now at Brunbelois, where, as I have heard, the splendour of her estate is tolerably notorious. I have not ever heard she gave a thought to me, her cat’s-paw. Madame, when I think of you and then of that sleek, smiling woman, I am appalled by my own folly. I am aghast by my long blindness as I write the words which no one will believe. To what avail do I deny a crime which every circumstance imputed to me and my own confession has publicly acknowledged?</p>
				<p>“But you, I think, will believe me. Look you, madame, I have nothing to gain of you. I shall not ever see you any more. I go into a perilous and an eternal banishment; and in the immediate neighbourhood of death a man finds little sustenance for romance. Take the worst of me: a gentleman I was born, and as a wastrel I have lived, and always very foolishly; but without dishonour. I have never to my knowledge⁠—and God judge me as I speak the truth!⁠—wronged any man or woman save myself. My dear, believe me! believe me, in spite of reason! and understand that my adoration and misery and unworthiness when I think of you are such as I cannot measure, and afford me no judicious moment wherein to fashion lies. For I shall not see you any more.</p>
				<p>“I thank you, madame, for your all-unmerited kindnesses, and, oh, I pray you to believe!”</p>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
