<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Critical Comment</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="foreword" epub:type="foreword">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Critical Comment</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span class="i1">And Norman <b>Nicolas</b> at hearté meant</span>
						<br/>
						<span>(Pardie!) some subtle occupation</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In making of his Tale of Melicent,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That stubbornly desirèd Perion.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For which he putteth life in forfeiture,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What perils for to rollen up and down,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So long process, so many a sly cautel,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For to obtain a silly damosel!</span>
					</p>
					<cite>Thomas Upcliffe</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<blockquote>
				<p>Nicolas de Caen, one of the most eminent of the early French writers of romance, was born at Caen in Normandy early in the 15th century, and was living in 1470. Little is known of his life, apart from the fact that a portion of his youth was spent in England, where he was connected in some minor capacity with the household of the Queen Dowager, Joan of Navarre. In later life, from the fact that two of his works are dedicated to Isabella of Portugal, third wife to Philip the Good, Duke of Burgundy, it is conjectured that Nicolas was attached to the court of that prince.⁠ ⁠… Nicolas de Caen was not greatly esteemed nor highly praised by his contemporaries, or by writers of the century following, but latterly has received the recognition due to his unusual qualities of invention and conduct of narrative, together with his considerable knowledge of men and manners, and occasional remarkable modernity of thought. His books, therefore, apart from the interest attached to them as specimens of early French romance, and in spite of the difficulties and crudities of the unformed language in which they are written, are still readable, and are rich in instructive detail concerning the age that gave them birth.⁠ ⁠… Many romances are attributed to Nicolas de Caen. Modern criticism has selected four only as undoubtedly his. These are⁠—(1) <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Les Aventures d’Adhelmar de Nointel</i>, a metrical romance, plainly of youthful composition, containing some seven thousand verses; (2) <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Le Roy Amaury</i>, well known to English students in Watson’s spirited translation; (3) <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Le Roman de Lusignan</i>, a re-handling of the Melusina myth, most of which is wholly lost; (4) <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Le Dizain des Reines</i>, a collection of quasi-historical <i xml:lang="it">novellino</i> interspersed with lyrics. Six other romances are known to have been written by Nicolas, but these have perished; and he is credited with the authorship of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Le Cocu Rouge</i>, included by Hinsauf, and of several Ovidian translations or imitations still unpublished. The Satires formerly attributed to him Bülg has shown to be spurious compositions of 17th century origin.</p>
				<footer role="presentation">
					<p epub:type="z3998:signature">—<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Noel Codman, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Handbook of Literary Pioneers</i>.</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
			<blockquote>
				<p>
					<i xml:lang="fr">Nicolas de Caen est un représentant agréable, naïf, et expressif de cet âge que nous aimons à nous représenter de loin comme l’âge d’or du bon vieux temps⁠ ⁠… Nicolas croyait à son Roy et à sa Dame, il croyait surtout à son Dieu. Nicolas sentait que le monde était semé à chaque pas d’obscurités et d’embûches, et que l’inconnu était partout; partout aussi était le protecteur invisible et le soutien; à chaque souffle qui frémissait, Nicolas croyait le sentir comme derrière le rideau. Le ciel par-dessus ce Nicolas de Caen était ouvert, peuplé en chaque point de figures vivantes, de patrons attentifs et manifestes, d’une invocation directe. Le plus intrépide guerrier alors marchait dans un mélange habituel de crainte et de confiance, comme un tout petit enfant. A cette vue, les esprits les plus émancipés d’aujourd’hui ne sauraient s’empêcher de crier, en tempérant leur sourire par le respect: Sancta simplicitas!</i>
				</p>
				<footer role="presentation">
					<p epub:type="z3998:signature">—Paul Verville, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Notice sur la vie de Nicolas de Caen</i>.</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
